Something shifted in 2026 that most
people haven't really sat with yet. 36%
of new companies are now solo founded,
one person, no co-founder, no team. And
this company is building things that
used to require 12 people, 100 people. 5
years ago, that number was 23%. Demand
for analytical and technical skills is
up 20% in [music] 2 years. And people
who actually work with AI, not just use
it, are pulling ahead visibly in terms
of salary, in terms of how they're
catching up with the world. And I wanted
to understand what's happening so you
can jump [music]
on these trends and maybe build a new
career, or build a new business, or at
least optimize your life. So, if you
have things in your life that you wish,
AI is changing how we do things and you
need to understand this. In this
episode, I will also talk to someone who
represents a company I admire, Yossi
Matias, head of Google Research. He
built Google Trends, something that I
use all the time. He built autocomplete.
He's been at Google for more than 20
years and Google is one of the top
companies leading this revolution. He
doesn't do many interviews, so I'm
really glad we did this one. Let's start
with trend number one, AI agents. When
most people think about AI, they think
about asking for information in a
chatbot. You ask something and answers.
What's actually happening right now is
different. Agents execute for you and
you hand off tasks across your entire
system, your email, your calendar, your
research, your CRM, [music] and you
don't have to touch it. For example, I
just set up an agent. It's really easy
to do that with Perplexity computer, for
example. [music] It just automates the
hell out of everything. So, I'm keeping
track of a couple of people on Instagram
>> [music]
>> and I want to know what's going viral
for them. So, Perplexity just goes,
analyzes what's going viral, and every
morning I get an email.
>> [music]
>> What's going on in their accounts, how
people are reacting, and I get a
personalized script on a similar topic
[music] so I can make a video. And it's
crazy. Stanford tracked that 35% of
productivity gains [music] is happening
right now from using context-aware
agents. That's the difference between a
4-day week and a 6-day [music] week.
What this means for your job is that the
person who learns to set and run an
agent isn't just [music] faster. They
are doing work that used to require two
or three people. Trend number two, vibe
coding. This one I personally find the
most exciting and honestly a little
wild. Vibe coding means describing in
plain language what you want to build
and having AI write the actual code. I
have a person on my team who doesn't
know how to code. She runs my LinkedIn.
And she had an idea on Tuesday, on
Thursday, it was a working product. And
again, she doesn't know how to code at
all. Yossi's team at Google has been
working on something they call
generative UI, where you describe what
you want and in about a minute, you get
a fully interactive application. Button,
logic, interface, all in a matter of few
minutes. Again, what this means for you,
if you've been waiting to build
something, a tool, a product, or a
workflow, or if you have an idea,
instead of just
talking about this idea to your
teammates, just go and build it. This
This barrier is gone. You talk to the
app and you pitch a prototype. I think
they're underhyped.
Oh, you think so? Okay.
>> And here's why. So, first we should
always keep in mind that what we're
seeing today is not the future. We're
just seeing today. And you know, having
been working for over a decade on
search,
um in search, we suddenly take the user
intent and we try to give the best
information. Now, with AI systems, we
can actually understand much better user
intent and let them actually express
what we do. Now, vibe coding is a great
example where people can now uh to be
developed.
And you can already everybody can now
develop an application that previously
required a team. Even [clears throat] um
we recently shared something that we
call generative UI that enables you to
actually for any prompt get a result um
out of uh we have a experiment within
our Gemini app called Dynamic View that
gives the full interaction fully
interactive user interface in about a
minute for any prompt that you ask. As
if somebody was developing an
application on your behalf. So, only you
need to say what you'd like to learn
about and it will sometimes even give
all the buttons and emulation. And in
fact, the technology is now available
also in um search AI mode. Trend number
three, the skills that actually matter
are shifting. The reflex most people
have is AI is replacing jobs, so I need
to become more technical to survive,
learn to code, get a data science
certificate, whatever. That's not wrong,
but it's incomplete. Yossi hires
constantly at Google Research, one of
the most exciting places to be right
now, and asked him directly, "What are
you actually looking for right now?" And
the answer wasn't a specific skill, it
was the ability to think, adapt, and
learn faster than technology changes. He
said people need to relearn how to work
even at senior levels because the tools
shift every single month. But what that
actually means in practice, the people
pulling ahead aren't the ones who know
more, they are the ones who know what to
give to AI and what questions to ask
when it gives back. So, if there is one
thing you should be working on, it's
actually your judgment. How do you know
what is good and what is bad in your
job? That judgment is learnable. You can
work for somebody who has perfect taste
and learn it from them. But almost
nobody's deliberately practicing it, but
that is exactly what's going to give you
premium when you're looking for a job. I
try to hire people have taste, who can
make strategic decisions, who know
what's great for my content, and I care
less about the technical skills because
again, Claude is someone who knows
everything about what's going on the
world, but it can't make a judgment as
good as a person. Yes, so in a way, I
remember I was asked, "So, how do you
think
uh things are going to change 5 years?"
And and I I thought about it.
In one hand, everything is going to be
different. On the other hand, nothing is
going to be different. I've heard that
at Davos this year. In in a way, I mean,
we're humans, right? And what's
motivation for what we're doing? It's
not really to fulfill a particular
predetermined task. We define our own
ambitions, our own tasks. Same with
learning. I remember the early days when
suddenly Google was made possible for
everybody to get facts and people said,
"Well, wait a minute, what's going to do
in uh for kids because we ask them to do
homework and collect facts in library
and now it's easy. Are they going to be
lazy?" Well, no, because now this is a
given, that's a tool. So, now we expect
them actually to go to the next level.
We expect them to synthesize. And now
with AI, of course, there's another
conversation, what is it going to do?
And my prediction is that in fact, we're
just going to uplevel what we expect.
That's why I'm thinking about AI as an
amplifier for human ingenuity. Now, what
are we going to do with that? That goes
back to the motivation. Why are we doing
what we're doing? So, in a way, um our
lifestyle going to change? Definitely,
but the basics are probably not going to
change at all, which is about people
working with other people, about uh
solving important problems that they're
excited about. Yeah. And as a person
who's constantly hiring, uh can you talk
about the skills that you're looking
for, uh both technical and uh
non-technical? One thing that I always
thought is is critical is the ability to
think, the ability to adapt, the ability
to evolve, the ability to actually think
about problems and then uh try to solve
them.
Now, today these are more important than
ever, of course, because, you know, uh
technology is moving fast. Uh people
need to adjust their learning even uh no
matter how experienced they are, there
are new technologies. Engineers need to
relearn, you know, how to use AI in
order to be more productive and there
and people are doing it.
So, the ability to adapt, to learn, to
have a strong foundation is more
important than ever. So, for example,
when I refer to AI as an amplifier of
human ingenuity and the opportunity for
every researcher to uh be able to use AI
in order to actually ask bigger
questions, it's important to also um
adapt and learn how to do that. You
know, if we really want people to be
able to do the kind of roles that today
we expect many more senior people who
are much more senior to do, obviously we
need them to learn how to do that much
quickly. The good news is
the fact that to write a paper, for
example,
AI can give you very the kind of
feedback that in the past you actually
needed the attention of your advisor,
perhaps, to do. Oh, yeah. So, so I think
we are we things are going to adapt in
all of these dimensions. And um I think
humans are
what we proved over the years is that
we're extremely adaptive.
>> Adaptive. Trend number four, AI is
becoming invisible. Yossi called it
ambient intelligence. The idea is that
technology becomes powerful precisely
when you stop noticing it. Think about
Google Translate. When did you last
think about how it works? You just use
it. Or autocomplete, Yossi built that.
Nobody thinks about autocomplete
anymore, it's just expected. That's
what's happening with AI tools right
now. What this means for you is that as
an employee, for example, I already
expect beautiful presentations. I
already expect that you do a very, very
deep dive into what's happening in the
business. Like all of these beautiful
documents, they are a must because it
takes a few minutes to generate them
with AI. There's deep intelligence on
the project. But again, it brings me
back to this idea that beautiful
reports, deep analytics, and everything
is already expected just because it's so
easy to do that. What we're paying
premium for is
creative decisions, right? Being on a
call and explaining to the team the
trajectory we're moving into. And that
is something you can't just generate
with AI. We're just talking about
replacing tools, switching agents,
rebuilding workflows. Founders do it all
the time. But there is one platform
almost nobody touches, their email,
because that's where the revenue lives.
Everyone's afraid to touch it. But what
I've noticed talking to so many builders
is that a lot of people are stuck on
platforms they've already outgrown. The
pricing doesn't scale, email and SMS
live in separate tools, automations take
forever to set up, and they stay not
because they're happy, but because
switching it does sound terrifying. This
part of the video is brought to you by
Omnisend, and they basically built their
entire onboarding around solving that
fear. Here's what they do. Completely
free migration, real humans handle
everything. Your contacts, campaigns,
automation flows, even your SMS number.
3 to 5 business days, and your old
platforms keeps running the entire time.
Nothing goes dark. You test everything
on Omnisend's side first, and you only
flip the switch when you're confident.
Support is 24/7, real people, average
reply time is under 4 minutes. Once
you're in, you take all in one place,
email, SMS, push notifications,
segmentation. Their customers average
$79 back for every dollar spent, and the
pricing is built so you're not punished
for growing. If you've been thinking
about making a move, even just
exploring, the link is in the
description. Use code Marina for 30% off
your first 3 months. Okay, now let's
talk about the next AI trend. So, one
notion that I've been [clears throat]
quite passionate about for quite some
time is what I would call ambient
intelligence,
which is that you have technologies that
you just use. You don't think about
them. This They're becoming so available
and so intuitive that you actually don't
You just assume they work, right? Uh
think about auto complete, which I also
had the
the the privilege to to develop with my
team over the years in search. People
just assume that you start typing, and
it's will just suggest to you. And I
remember that that people were in the
early days, "So, what about this magic?
Wow, how does it make a guess?" And
today you just expect it to be the case,
right?
>> Mhm.
And similarly, you can think about so
many other technologies. Think about
voice uh technology. The fact that now
you can speak, and um and you know, it
should you expect what you're speaking
to be understood. You can take text, you
can listen to it. I remember actually
working on these technologies in the
early days. This was the aspiration.
Yeah. And now you just assume this is
the case. Think about multiple
languages.
I still remember the day that one of my
kids came from school and say, "Hey Dad,
what what's going on with your
translate? That line, that sentence was
not translated very well. It's actually
quite um bad translation." And I was
thinking to myself, you know, just a few
years ago,
having automatic translation of your
page was a science fiction, and he
assumes this is just available. Trend
number five, AI is rebuilding education.
Oh, I absolutely love Google's Notebook
LM. If you haven't used it for education
yet, it's basically you upload a bunch
of files, and then you ask it, "And now
imagine it releveled for a 10-year-old
who loves soccer, or gravity is
explained using a free kick, or turned
into a podcast, or an infographic that
you can then post on LinkedIn." And
those infographics do really well. Or
you can make a whole video out of it and
post it on YouTube. Like that's
explanation for you, but also a lot of
social media content. The model where
you had one textbook, one level, same
for everyone is 200 years old. AI is
breaking it, and I think a lot about my
daughters on this one. Kids who grow up
with personalized AI tutors from age 5
are going to arrive at 18 with a
completely different foundation than
kids who didn't. That's a 10-year
advantage. So, if you are reskilling
now, make sure you use all of the
advanced tools. You know, education,
which is one of those um I think is
highly important, is is a way that is
really poised to be transformed. And and
we have recent experiment of asking
ourselves, can we reimagine the
textbook?
Instead, can we take a textbook and use
AI in order to actually
give it in different experiences that
are going to be personalized and
contextualized? So, for example, can I
have an immersive Can I take the text
and make it immersive? Think Harry
Potter. Can I make it conversational?
Can I have a sketchbook with that? A
podcast.
>> Yeah. can I have it in a level that is
suitable for the audience? So, for
example, can I explain gravity to a
10-year-old who likes soccer, so that a
textbook can actually be
releveled to 10-year-old kind of
language, and give examples from soccer?
The answer is yes, we actually have some
experiment. And these are early days, so
I expect that in future it's going to be
seamless, it's going to be kind of just
available to us. The trend that I'm
seeing though, as a mom though, is that
now kids are expected to know how to
read when they start school, right? Cuz
back in the day, you're like, your kid
goes to school, no letters, no numbers.
Now they're like, "Oh, actually have the
classes already reading, and they're 5
years old." And you're like, "Well,
okay."
>> kids are already smarter, I think, than
the older generation, and I think the
next generation is going to be even
smarter because they're going to have AI
in their disposal.
>> Yeah. So, and by the way,
you know, typically we had to most
people had to focus and learn certain
subject, and focus mostly on that one.
And when they wanted to work across
disciplines, they had to meet with other
folks, and try to somehow do that
together.
We're going to have Everybody's going to
have a polymath in their pocket. Trend
number six that makes me actually really
very optimistic. Problems that were
impossible are being solved in 5 years.
I want to end on this one because I
think it really changes how you hold
everything else I just said. Your system
builds flood prediction systems. 7 years
ago, every expert they talked to said it
was impossible. Too many variables, no
clean data, no way to get to 7 days.
Today, that system covers 150 countries
and 2 billion people. Under 5 years
start to finish. And we're getting
better and better. Stanford economists
called 2025 the AI harvest period. The
experiments are done. What works is
separating from what doesn't. The
industries with the highest AI exposure
right now are seeing labor productivity
grow 4.8 times faster than the global
average. And that's already measured.
Like, how productive we're getting is
just crazy. So, when you're hearing AI
can't do that yet,
uh maybe now, but see what happens in 2
weeks. Stay curious about what AI can
and can't do. We all heard about a guy
creating a vaccine for his dying dog to
treat cancer, and being willing to
update your answer every few months,
that might be the best underrated thing
you can do for your career right now.
When I say AI is an amplifier of human
ingenuity, this is not only a
prediction, this is a design goal. This
is how I like us to build our systems,
how I'd like us to see how we are
helping uh you know, our the society to
actually do that, how we're influencing
education, so that our kids can actually
grow into this future, and uh and I'm
quite optimistic about what how we can
actually have those uh next generation
solve many other problems in the world.
>> Yeah, cuz they have more to work with. I
I just wanted to ask you one last
question. If somebody wants to remember
one thing from this conversation, what
is the mindset that they should adopt
for 2026 to stay as positive as you are,
and also relevant in the job market?
Yeah, so one exciting thing is about uh
using technology in research is that
certain problems that seem impossible
are not necessarily impossible. In fact,
I've yet to see something that is
impossible to tackle. Here's an example.
One area that we're using AI quite a bit
is on climate resilience. How to address
natural disasters. One thing I learned
at the time is that
uh one area that were not very helpful
is in area of natural dis of flood of
flood flood prediction. Floods are, you
know, causing thousands of deaths every
year. Fast forward, we now have a system
that provides um
flood predictions in 150 countries,
covering 2 billion people, predictions
up to 7 days in advance.
And from what seemed to be impossible
just 7 years ago, we have a system doing
that. It's a really opportunity for
innovation to create value.
Um by the way, on health care, we put
out um a model called Med-Gemini, which
now have over 2 million downloads, by
which enables developers develop their
own applications on medical
capabilities. So, in this video, six
trends, real data, real examples from
someone who has been building this for
20 years. Here's what I want you to take
away from this. Trends are happening
regardless if you're with them or not.
The people who are pulling ahead right
now aren't necessarily the most
technical, most hardworking people in
the room. They are the most curious.
They're the ones who are trying the
tool, who are playing with things,
reading something on X, watching some
good YouTube videos, ask the question,
updated their workflow, and move on to
the next thing. You already did that
today. That's not nothing. By the way,
if you're watching this and you're like,
"Marina, you're trying to not think with
your AI." I haven't even build a
thinking buddy when it comes to AI, but
I really want to have that option.
Please subscribe to my email. This is
exactly where I talk about these things,
how we build them, and how they're
working for us. And we give you the
exact prompts and the exact files you
can just copy and paste into your
workflows. Thank you so much for
watching this video up to the very end.
Don't forget to subscribe, and I'll see
you very soon. Bye.